(upbeat music)
Alright, we are going to build
a shopping list where you can go
and add things to it like juice,
and when you hit Enter, it will add that item.
When you have it, you could check it off.
If you wanna delete it, you can.
Now you may have written something like this before.
It's not all that outlandish,
however I faked a whole bunch of things
that we need to learn about JavaScript
into this fairly simple example.
So we're gonna be learning about emitting custom events.
Let me see if I can show you.
Look at this,
list.dispatchEvent new CustomEvent itemsUpdated.
So like what are custom events?
We're gonna be learning about that.
Event delegation.
How do you listen for clicks
on things that happen in the future?
Different DOM events.
We're gonna be looking at the local storage.
If you go to your Application tab and open it up,
you'll see that like look at this,
I've got a whole bunch of,
this is everything right here.
And when I refresh the page,
you see that it just immediately re-renders it back.
If I were to remove one,
you see that it's removed from local storage.
And I refresh the page, it's gone.
So there's a whole lot here that we're going to learn about.
So let's get going.
This one, if you go to your index.html,
you'll see a couple things.
I've given you a shopping list
where we have a form element and an empty ul.
That's where we're gonna dump everything in.
And then we also have a form
which has our input and our submit button.
Now you can just go ahead
and open this sucker up in the browser
just like I have right here and it will work just fine.
However if you do want the live reloading
and the instant CSS changes,
like if we go into shopping.css and change something,
like change the padding to five rem and hit Save,
it will immediately update
instead of us having to refresh the page,
and I find that to be very helpful
when you're working on stuff like this.
So I'm gonna show you how to do it.
Now the tool that we use is called Parcel
and it will give us a server,
it will give us library load,
and it also will do module bundling
which we haven't learned yet,
and we're not gonna do that in this one just yet.
Now in order to install it on your machine,
you have two options.
You can install it once to each project
which we did in the last one,
or you can install it globally.
Or I should say and,
you can install it globally on your machine.
So anytime you have an HTML file with some JavaScript,
you can get a little server up and running,
and that is super handy.
So the way that you do that
is you need to type npm install -g,
and we are going to install parcel-bundler,
and what that will do is it will install
Parcel globally on your machine,
so anytime you're in a terminal,
whether it's a VS Code terminal or any other terminal,
it will be available as a command called parcel.
That installed just fine for me.
A lot of times you'll have a problem
installing global modules on your command line.
So if that's the case,
just type a sudo space in front of that,
and that's for Mac people only,
and that will ask you for your password first.
Type it in and then it will install,
and that will almost always fix the issues that you have.
You can tell if it works by just typing parcel --version,
and it will tell you what version you have.
More likely than not,
by the time you're watching this,
Parcel 2 will be out,
however none of the commands that I say will change.
If you see 2.0, that's good, it's even better,
but we haven't seen it released just yet,
so don't sweat that just yet.
Okay, now in order to run this thing,
we type parcel and then index.html.
Make sure you're in the Shopping List directory.
And this will start up a little server
usually on localhost:1234.
And you can see it up and running.
Again you can also do this via VS Code.
Right-click Shopping List, Open in Terminal,
and you can type parcel index.html,
and you see now it's running
on two different servers for me
'cause now I'm opening it on 1234 and 466, whatever.
You see that it's working on different domain names.
Alright, I'm gonna close that down.
So I'm just gonna hit Control + C to kill that one.
You'll see that it no longer works.
And I'm going to be using my external terminal here.
So let's get going in shopping.js.
I'm just gonna clear that out.
You should have nothing in your shopping.js file.
If you don't see it there,
make sure you create a shopping.js.
And there is kind of like a couple things
that need to happen here.
First we need to listen for
when somebody types into this input
and hits the Submit button,
then we need to keep track
of all of the shopping list items
and whether or not they are complete,
and then third we need to listen
or we need to render out a list of all of those items.
So let's get into that.
By the way if this is kind of annoying,
you see like everything I've ever
typed into here now pops up.
What you can do is you can go to your index.html
and you can either on an input or form-wide,
you can set autocomplete, oh, autocapitalize,
autocomplete to false.
No, maybe that's not it.
Is it off?
There we go.
You can set autocomplete to be off
and that will stop that from popping up.
There's also autocapitalize as well.
And if you don't want like on your phone,
it will automatically capitalize,
that's annoying when you have like
a user login form that may be case sensitive.
So let's go here and let's go ahead and select
all of the items that we need here,
and the items that we need
are this shopping form here and this list.
So I'll go back to our JavaScript and I'll say const
shoppingForm is equal to, get rid of the sidebar,
document.querySelector .shopping,
and then we'll duplicate that
and change this out to list
and something with a class of list.
Next we need an array to hold all of our items.
So we need an array to hold our,
I can use a word here that is a buzzword
and that is called state.
We need an array to hold our state.
What does state mean?
That's a word that gets thrown around a lot.
From framework to framework it sorta means different things.
But generally what people are saying is that
when you have state, state is a bunch of data
that reflects the state of your application.
So what does that mean?
If I take a look at in this answer that I have here,
state is going to contain a list of all of my items
and a list of all the IDs of each of those items,
and whether or not they have been completed or not.
If it was a shopping cart,
state might be a list of all the items
in your shopping cart,
how many of each item was in the shopping cart,
how expensive each item is,
whether or not there's coupons applied or sales.
Like basically you should be able to always recreate
the visual part of your application just given the data,
meaning that all of the current state of your application
how it currently is should always be reflected
in some sort of object or array of data,
and that is what we refer to as state.
Okay, so next up, what we need to do
is listen for a submit event on this form,
because if I type in here
and I type in eggs and add the item,
what happens?
Well, the form submits
and then it puts item equals eggs in the URL
but it's not what we want here.
So we will go ahead and make a submit handler for that.
So I'll make a function handleSubmit
that gives us our event,
and then we will first at least
stop that thing from submitting.
So we just say e.preventDefault.
And we'll grab our shoppingForm,
and we'll add an event listener for the submit event.
Remember that we don't use like click or Enter
or anything like that on forms
because it's much easier
to just listen for the submit event,
and that way if you submit it by clicking,
you submit it by hitting Enter,
something else submits that event,
something else triggers the submit of that
like you can use other JavaScript
to trigger a submit on a form,
all of those use cases are covered by a single event,
and that is called submit,
and when that happens,
we are going to pass it the handleSubmit callback.
Now let me get this item eggs off here, visit the URL,
and type in eggs and hit Enter and nothing happens.
So that's good.
Maybe we should console.log Submitted.
Now we need to do is pull the data out of here.
So if I type in eggs and hit add item,
we need to pull the data out of that.
So how can we get that?
So I'll say const name is equal to e.currentTarget.value.
And we should console.log, the name of what they added in.
And you see I just like refreshed it myself there.
It's not needed because it will do it for you.
Eggs submitted undefined.
E.currentTarget.value.
That gives me undefined.
Okay, why is that?
Oh, let's do a little bit of debugging.
console.log e.currentTarget.
Oh, that's why.
Because the current target is the form,
and we want to get the text out of the input.
So there's a couple of ways we could go about this.
You could write another query selector to grab it.
But because this input has a name,
it's actually accessible
via the form dot the name of the input,
and I'll show you why.
If I take this form
and make it a global variable called temp1,
I can say temp1 and you can,
actually console.dir temp1,
and that will show you all of the properties inside of it,
and you can see that, what do we call this item?
We go down to,
somewhere in here is item.
I can't find it but I'll show you.
So e.currentTarget.item.
You see now we get the actual input,
not the form itself.
So if we say e.currentTarget.item.value,
we should be able to get eggs, there we go.
Eggs, good.
So next step is that we need to store
the data about this item, the shopping item,
in this items array,
but we can't just store straight up string
because we need to be able to store
a little bit more information about that item.
The other two things that we need to know
are is it completed?
Have you bought it already or not?
And what is the ID of that item?
Anytime you have a list of a bunch of items,
it's best to give every single one a unique identifier
so that you can go ahead and easily find it
when you wanna do things like remove it
or mark it as complete.
So that's what we're gonna do right now
is we'll just say const item is equal to.
Now the name of the item is going to be our name variable.
The ID of the item is it just needs to be something unique,
and one little trick I like to use
is just to use Date.now as an ID.
And as long as you aren't creating
more than one item per millisecond,
then you're fine.
In some cases that actually might be a problem
like for a database.
You could save 100 records in a couple milliseconds
and then they would override each other.
But in our case you're not adding
more than one item within a millisecond.
So Date.now is totally fine for the ID there.
And then complete is going to be false
'cause by default they are not completed.
You can see when I saved there,
my Prettier did a couple things.
It refactored name name just to name
and that put a semicolon on the end there.
Now we need to do is push the items into our state.
So we'll say items.push item.
And we can do something like this.
There are now items.length in your state.
Let's try it, eggs.
There are now one in your state.
Bread.
There are now two in your state, good.
And if we just take a look at items,
you would see both of them are in there.
Now we need to do is to clear the form.
So there are a couple ways you could do this.
We could just take the event.currentTarget.value
and set it to nothing, and that should work.
Good.
The other way which you can do it
if you have multiple inputs
is called e.target.reset,
and that will clear all of the inputs
in a particular form which is really easy.
You notice I used target and not currentTarget.
What's the difference in this case?
Does that work too?
That works exactly the same way.
When you have a form event,
it will only actually ever fire on the form,
and it doesn't bubble like our clicks and hovers do
like we looked at.
Remember, go back and watch the bubbling video
if you're unfamiliar with that.
In this case e.Target worked just fine.
There's literally no upside or downside
to using either one of those.
Alright, so now we have this function
that will handle submit and will create an item
and push it into our item state.
Next up we need to do is to display the items in there.
So let's make a function here called displayItems.
And we will say const HTML is equal to.
We'll take our items and we'll loop over each of them
and return a list item for each.
So what's the best array method
to loop over an array and return some HTML for each one?
Well, map is a really good use case for this, why?
Because if I have a simple little array here,
maybe names is equal to Wes and Kate,
if I take my names and I map over each one,
I can get a name,
and for each one I can simply
just return like a list item,
and then inside of it,
I can interpolate the name.
And you see what happened there
is that I looped over an array of names,
and for each one, I returned a list item
with the name inside of it.
And then we can simply call join on the end,
and that will give us one HTML string.
So that's what we're gonna be doing
with each of our items here.
Before I even go,
I'll just console.log the items.
And we'll say items.map item.
And we can return back ticks.
We'll put a list item inside,
and let's just say item.name.
Now let's console.log the HTML,
and you see it refactored that for me
because it turned it from an explicit return with a block
to a simple implicit return 'cause it was very small.
I'll show you how to bring that back if we need to.
Now how do I run this display item?
You might be thinking, okay we'll let's,
we need to display them after you submit it, right?
So let's just go ahead and do that.
And that's okay.
But I'm gonna show you a better way to do it
and why in just a second with custom events.
For now it's fine to keep that in there
and we'll come back and refactor it.
So if I type eggs, add an item,
you see I got an li with eggs.
Milk.
Here you see what's happening.
Each time that we submit it,
we push that item into state,
and then when that's all done,
we call displayItems and that will loop over
and return a list item with each of them.
So a couple problems here.
First, we need to,
this is not HTML, this is an array.
So if on the end of that,
if we tack a dot join and join it on nothing,
that should give us one milk, eggs, bread.
Good, now we've got one string.
Then what we can do is we can take our list
and set the inner HTML.
So we'll say list.innerHTML is equal to the HTML.
Milk, eggs, bread.
Okay, that's working so far,
but we need to make it a little bit further
because we need a delete button and a check button.
So let's scaffold this out a little bit further.
I'm gonna leave the open li on that line.
I'm gonna put the closing li on that line,
and that's why we use back ticks here
so we can do multi-line.
Now this item here needs a class of shopping item.
That's just so that our CSS will pick it up.
Now when I give it a save,
I love prettier.
That's why it's so good,
it will put it on its own line for you
and take care of it.
So milk, eggs, bread.
So you see that the styling is now being picked up.
Now for each one we need a checkbox
and that is an input with the type of checkbox.
So let's say input type equals checkbox.
Then we have our item name so we'll give ourselves a span,
and that will have a class of itemName.
we'll put the item.name in there.
And then we need a button with a &times in there,
and that will give us a little x.
Let's see.
Milk, eggs.
Why is it?
Oh, I forgot to delete this.
Okay, seems to be looking okay.
Couple things we need to do here
is that first of all this is inaccessible
to people here who are using screen readers
because if they were to read these items
over to them via screen reader,
it would just say multiplication sign,
and they'll be like uh, what?
I don't wanna multiply my bananas.
I wanna remove it.
So what we can do here
is we put an aria-label on it that says Remove
and will interpolate the item.name inside of there.
And then when they, for sighted users,
you'd just see an x,
but for anyone using a screen reader,
when they tab over to it,
see how it's highlighted right there?
It will tell them remove asdf
or remove bananas from the item.
Couple other things we need is when you check one of these,
we need to save that data to our state
and then update the checked property of the input.
And then there's a couple other name attributes
that need to be added to this,
but we'll cross that bridge when we get to it.
One more thing I saw right here is that
if I just hit Enter on it,
you see I'm getting a lot of blank inputs.
A couple of ways we could fix that
would be to type a required on this input here.
And you see now it doesn't do that anymore.
That's sort of just like client side validation.
And another thing we could do
is we could say if there's no name, return.
And I didn't put curly brackets there.
Go back to the video about conditionals,
you'll learn that if it's on one line,
you don't necessarily need it.
In this case it puts it on one line.
I'm gonna do it all on one line
just 'cause it's nice and short.
And then if I take this required off,
you'll see it's running the submit,
but it's stopping the function from running
if there's nothing there.
So maybe you'll say if it's empty,
then don't submit it.
Let's just double check that with
if I have a zero, it still works, right,
because it's a string of zero.
If I have a null, undefined, false,
why are these all working?
I thought they were falsey?
It's 'cause these are all strings and not types
of a number, null, undefined, or boolean.
Alright, let's talk about this displayItems function
and this handleSubmit function
where the handleSubmit function will do its work
and then it will just call the displayItems function for us.
The reason why I don't love that
is because that too tightly couples
the handleSubmit with the displaying of the items.
And what's gonna happen is that
we are also gonna need to display the items
when the items are restored from local storage,
because like when I refresh the page,
I want the items to still be there,
so I'm gonna have to call that again.
Then we're also going to need to display the items
when we mark them as complete,
like if I check one off,
it should re-render that entire list.
When you delete an item,
it's going to need to rerun displayItems
'cause there's now one less item
we need to regenerate this HTML.
And a couple other spots
we need to rerun this displayItems function.
Now having this so tightly coupled with it
is not really that big of a deal right now,
but what happens in larger JavaScript applications
is that you may need to do three or four things right here,
like do four more things here,
and what tends to happen is that you run into these cases
where you're like, okay, that's great,
but now I have a situation where I wanna handleSubmit,
but I don't wanna do two of those four things.
And then you're like, well, how do I run this function
but not run the two of the four things?
And then what happens is people just
copy paste the entire function
and now they have like duplicated logic in two spots.
So what we're doing now is we are going to use
the event system in JavaScript to fire off our own events,
and then we are going to listen for those events,
we're going to listen for an items updated event,
and then anybody who cares about items updating,
like let's say like we wanted to have analytics,
like send data to server about updated items,
anyone who cares about updated items,
whether it's the displayer
or whether it's the analytics
or whether it's the server,
they can all listen for this new event
just like if it were a click or a hover
except now we've sort of decoupled that,
and that makes things a lot nicer,
and you'll see that pattern actually quite frequently
in a lot of this JavaScript application.
So that's what we're going to do right now
is instead of displaying our items,
we are going to fire off a custom event
that will tell anyone else who cares
that the items have been updated.
So first of all, to do custom events in the browser,
you need to fire them from or you need to,
I'm gonna use the word dispatch,
and dispatch means an event happens.
When I click on something,
the browser dispatches a click event.
When I focus this,
the browser dispatches a focus event.
So what we care about is that we need something
to fire off an event about that data,
and you need to attach it.
So if I look at my HTML here,
I'm probably going to fire off that event from this list.
You could also fire it off in the form or even the body.
It doesn't really matter all that match.
We'll tick the list.
So go down here, we'll say list,
and then we will run the dispatchEvent method.
So a dispatchEvent is a method
that lives on all DOM elements,
and then you have to give it a custom event,
and custom event is a constructor in the browser.
CustomEvent, you see that it's just a function,
and if you were to run it by passing it
the name of your event like pizzas here,
oh, please use the new operator.
Sorry about that.
Here we go.
(laughs)
(coughs)
You see what happened is
just like we deal with the event inside of here,
you can fire off your own custom events,
and inside of that event,
you'll see that this is a custom event,
just like events we've seen before,
it gives us the type of the event
as well as it will give us any detail when it is fired.
Here we are dispatching an event,
and when we want to dispatch an event,
we create a new CustomEvent,
and we pass it the name of the event, itemsUpdated.
Notice how I put a capital U on updated there,
so I camel cased it.
Then when you go ahead and add in eggs,
nothing happens, it just dispatched that event.
Nobody's listening for itemsUpdated so nobody cares.
But if we were to go down to where we add
our event listeners and say something like
list.addEventListener,
we're going to listen for the itemsUpdated event,
and when that happens, we can run the displayItems callback.
You see, oh, look what's happening.
We listened for the itemsUpdated and ran it.
So that's no different,
we can add as many event listeners
to the same event as we want.
So if this was the case,
I could just take the event
and console.log the event.
So I type get.
You see this is the CustomEvent.
The type is itemsUpdated.
The target is ul.list.
And there's some timestamps,
some other information about what happened,
even the path, that's actually kind of cool.
This is the path at which the events have bubbled through.
So it first triggered on the ul,
then it bubbled up to the shopping list,
bubbled up to the body, bubbled up to HTML,
bubbled up to the document,
and finally bubbled up to the window.
So that is our CustomEvent.
I use those quite frequently
when I'm doing Vanilla JavaScript
to keep my concerns separate
and not to tightly tie these functions together.
So I'm gonna get rid of this other one right here.
We just care about the displaying items.
Next thing we wanna do is mirror these data
to the local storage.
So local storage is sort of like a mini database
that lives inside of your browser,
and it allows users who are using your website
to come back with the same browser
and sort of pick up from where they last left.
So this is not sending data to a server.
It's just the ability to save some data
in the user's browser for the featured time.
And if you go to the Application tab
and look at Local Storage
and then click on your domain name,
you will see or you won't see anything.
This is just 'cause I did it previously,
but we're storing information
about all of these items here in our local storage.
If you go to any website,
you'll be able to see what kind of information are there.
So let's make a function that will actually
mirror our data to local storage.
So we'll say function here,
we'll call it mirrorToLocalStorage.
Let's just console.info
Saving items to local storage.
Now when I add something,
we need to listen for that event
and then mirror all of these items to local storage.
So what we can do is we can just
duplicate this line 47 I have here,
we'll add a new one listening for itemsUpdated,
and when that happens, we will mirrorToLocalStorage.
You see how nice this is is anybody who cares
about items updating can listen in on that.
And I'll type hey, this says Saving items to localstorage.
Now how do you save items to local storage?
Well, local storage is pretty simple.
The API looks like this.
You type in localStorage,
and if you type that, it will give you the items,
and everything that is in local storage.
You can use a local storage that set item,
and setItem will take two things, a key and a value.
So if I wanna set my name is equal to wes,
and the opposite of that is localStorage.getItem
where you just give it the key that you are looking for
and it will pull it back.
I could bet I can look into the application, Local Storage,
you see now my name is equal to wes.
If you have a bunch of data in there
or something's going goofy with local storage,
it's best just to clear it all out and start fresh.
There's never really an issue
with clearing out local storage,
pass all of your items that you saved
in there will now be gone forever.
So how do we store our items?
Let's try this.
localStorage.setItem,
we're gonna set the item's key
and we'll just pass it items
like our array of items.
Let's try it.
Milk, eggs, bread.
Go to our Application tab, Local Storage,
Items, object object object.
What?
Object object object object object object.
What is going on here?
And if you open it up,
it's just the word object.
There's no actual objects in here.
And why is that?
Well, local storage is text only.
So meaning that if you have
an array or an object or a boolean
or anything like that,
what will happen is that it will try to convert
that item to text first before it puts it in.
And every single type has a dot to string method.
So if you have like a number, const age equal to 100,
that age will have a dot to string method on it,
which it will convert it to a string.
If you have an array,
so const names is equal to wes and kate, names.toString,
it will convert it by just joining them with a comma.
Now if you have an object const person is equal to wes,
and you call person.toString,
it just gives you object, Object
which is not helpful at all.
And that's exactly what's happening
is that local storage is going, whoa,
wasn't expecting an object,
better convert it to a string first,
and then that's all it can do,
and that's not very helpful 'cause there's no data in that.
So how do you convert objects to strings?
Well, we talked about it in an earlier lesson,
and that is with JSON.
If you call capital JSON.stringify,
and you pass it the person,
what it will do is it will convert that object
to a string representation of that object,
and then at a later point in time,
we can do the opposite which is JSON.parse,
and if you pass it a string,
it will convert it back into an object,
and that's exactly what we're gonna do here
is that before we put it into local storage,
we'll convert it to a string,
and when we pull it out of local storage,
we'll convert it back into an array of objects.
So just wrap this into JSON.stringify,
and try to add eggs, go to your Application,
you see there's our item.
Name, eggs, ID is equal to that timestamp,
and complete is set to false.
Add bread, beer,
you see that these items are being added onto it.
It will attempt to detect what you have in here
and convert it so you can nice and easily see it,
but it's just doing stringify for you
in this little visual Application tab.
So now that we mirror everything to local storage,
we need another function that when you load the page,
we want to restore from local storage.
Let's go ahead and do that.
We'll make a function here called restoreFromLocalStorage,
and this is simply just gonna run on page load.
So you can just run that right there.
And we'll console.info Restoring from local storage.
Let's just check that that actually works.
There we go.
Now we'll pull the items from local storage,
so we'll say const lsItems.
I'm gonna make sort of a temporary variable here
just to put them, so it stands for local storage,
and we'll say JSON.parse,
and we need to pull it out of local storage,
so we'll say localStorage.getItem
and we'll look for the items, right,
because this localStorage.getItem
will bring us back a big string of text.
And if we wrap that in a JSON.parse,
that will give us an array.
So lsItems.
And then here we'll say if lsItems.length,
then we check if there are some items
'cause it's likely that this is the first time
the user has loaded the application
and there'll be nothing in local storage,
not even an empty array.
So we check if there's a length,
and what we'll do is we'll dump the list items
into our items variable up here.
So do this, items, there.
And then we will dispatch the itemsUpdated event.
So we'll say list.dispatchEvent
new CustomEvent, itemsUpdated.
I believe that this will cause an error,
an uncaught error, items is read-only, and why?
Well, we have our binding here which is our items,
and we don't wanna really overwrite it, right?
So a couple options that we have here is
you could change this to a let,
and look, that works.
It just restores the items.
Another option is to push them all into the items.
So if we say items.push,
and we push each individual item in there,
so lsItems, zero, let's try that.
See if I push the first one in,
it restores just the first one.
So you might think like,
okay, we could say lsItems.forEach,
and then we'll just say items.push,
and then item, and push the item.
That only does the first one if I have another one.
Refresh, that actually works just fine.
And then I'll show you another way
'cause there's always a hundred different ways
to do things in JavaScript is we could just say
items.push and spread the lsItems into it,
and why does that work?
Well, the reason why that works
is because push takes unlimited arguments.
I could do this, lsItems is the first one,
and then the second one,
and that should restore the first two items for us.
There we go, first two.
So by spreading into a function,
you'd take each item and pass it as the first,
the second, the third, the fourth argument of the function.
So spreading into them, that's called spreading arguments
where you take each item of an array
and spread it into the method as an argument.
So there's tons of different ways,
use whichever way you prefer.
And it looks like it is up and running.
Two more things we need to do,
we need to handle the clicking of the check boxes.
And you might say like, oh, it works fine,
but when you refresh,
the fact that you bought that thing is no longer there,
so we need to mirror that data to state.
And then we also need to handle the deleting of these.
Let's do that now.
So you might think like, okay,
let me select the buttons on the page,
loop over them, listen for a click,
and when that happens, remove it from our array.
And you're kinda right,
but I'll show you why that doesn't exist.
If I were to select all those buttons,
the const buttons is equal to list.querySelectorAll,
and we'll just look for a button.
If I console.log buttons,
how many should we get?
We get five.
Now watch, if I move that up above this, we get none.
Move it below,
we get five.
Move it above,
we get none.
Okay, why is that?
Well, that's because when you run it here,
all of this has not yet been created,
meaning that we haven't actually created these items here.
If I run a debugger command right here,
if I run a debugger command right here,
watch, the selector has run already
but there's no items in it.
It only happens a little bit later
once I sort of keep jumping through that
and then they will be created.
So you might say, okay, Wes, well, like,
oh, let me put it lower.
And you think you're a hotshot
by putting them lower on the page.
Well, let's go ahead and try that.
Okay, so they're all there.
Maybe we'll listen for a click on each.
So buttons.forEach
button button.addEventListener click,
and we will run a deleteItem function.
I'll go ahead and make that function.
Let's put it up here.
That item will take in an ID.
And we'll just say console.log deleting item.
You see it says deleting item.
So that works on all of them,
but if I were to add a new one, let's say, food.
Now we have another item at the end,
and if I click on it, it doesn't say deleting item.
Well, this one should still work, right?
Oh, actually no.
Why did that happen?
And there's sort of two things going on here.
First of all if you try to listen for clicks
on things that do not exist on the page,
it will not attach an event listener to that element.
So that's why when we moved it up here,
it was listening for clicks on none.
But when we moved it down here,
the things did exist on the page,
and that's why it's listening for a click.
But we have the second problem where,
let me show you this,
I'm gonna add something,
but keep your eyes on my ul right here.
When I add in oj and hit Enter,
you see how that re-rendered the entire list?
Turning that purple like that,
what that means is that we have rerun
our displayItems function here,
and it's actually creating brand new list items each time.
And when you remove an item from the DOM
and replace it with a new item,
all of those event listeners are lost,
and we would have to manually add them back
every single time that we create it,
and that is a bit of a pain to do.
So what are we supposed to do?
Well, we can use this concept
that is called event delegation,
and what that means is instead of listening for clicks
on things that might not exist yet
or things that will come in the future,
what we do is we listen for clicks
on things that we do know will be there,
and then we check if the thing
that they actually clicked on is a lower item.
So let me show you how that works.
Let's get rid of this button.forEach,
let's get rid of this console.log,
get rid of this querySelector,
and we'll keep our deleteItem function up and running.
What we'll do is we will listen for a click
on our list.addEventListener click.
And when that happens, we'll get the event.
By the way I'm using event and e interchangeably here
just to show you that you can use either.
And if we were to console.log e.target and e.currentTarget,
watch what happens.
Go to the Console and click on, anywhere on it.
e is not defined (laughs).
Okay, change that back to e.
There we go.
You see that it thinks I'm clicking on the span
but we listened on the list.
And now if I click on the x here,
we listened on the list,
but we actually clicked on the button.
So what we can do here is we can say
if the e.target,
remember the target is the thing
that they actually clicked on,
the currentTarget is the thing
that you listened for the event on,
if the e.target.matches button,
so matches will do is it will check
if an element matches a CSS selector,
and so if it matches button,
then we will delete the item
and pass it the ID of that item.
We'll look at that in just a second.
So now when I click on the x's,
it says deleting item, deleting item,
I'm sorry I spelled that wrong,
deleting item, deleting item.
And if I add a new one,
we don't have to add a new event listener
'cause there's only one event listener here
and that is on the ul.
I'm simply just listening on the ul
and delegating the event to the delete button
that we have here.
So let's write a little comment here.
Event Delegation we listen for the click on the list ul,
but then delegate the click over to the button
if that is what was clicked.
Beautiful.
One more thing I should say while we're talking about this,
whenever we add an item to this list,
we re-render the entire list.
We were basically deleting the list
and creating a brand new one and sticking it in.
And you can't even see that happening
'cause it happens so quickly,
but on large, large, large applications,
that can possibly slow down how your application works.
And that's where frameworks like Angular, React, Ember, Vue,
that's where they come in very handy because they'll know
instead of just re-rendering the entire list,
they'll know, oh, we should only update this li,
and just changing part of the DOM
rather than just wiping it out
will lead to better performing application.
That's kinda hard to do in just Vanilla JavaScript
and it's totally fine in this application,
but just know that in larger applications,
that is one of the major benefits to using a framework
over just JavaScript like we're doing here.
Now next up we need to figure out
when somebody clicks on this x,
what ID of item is it related to?
And the way that we can do that
is we can give our button a value.
So when we go and create this button,
you see we have our aria-label Remove.
We can even put these on their own line here.
We can also give this button a value of item.id.
Now when I inspect element on one of these,
you see that the ID of the item is now in the button,
and we can pass that ID, e.target.value, to the deleteItem.
And in here we can just log the ID.
So let's see if it works and we'll explain it one more time.
Deleting item, there we go.
So why does that work?
Well, when you click on the button,
we will then take the value of that button
and pass it as an argument to our deleteItem function
which then comes in here.
And now we have a variable called id.
Now how do we update our items array without this one?
Well, it's actually pretty simple
because we can just filter for every single item
that is not the one with the ID.
So we'll just say const newItems
is equal to items.filter item,
and then we'll say,
remember filter is yes or no,
does it equal it?
So we'll say item.id is equal to the ID that got passed in.
So if the ID of the item
is equal to the one that got passed in,
then we want to keep it,
and we'll put that into newItems.
It's backwards I know.
We'll flip it in just a second.
Now when I delete it,
newItems is equal to nothing,
item.id is equal to the id.
Okay, so something's wrong here.
If I make that a double equals, does it fix it?
Yes.
Okay, so why does it work
with one equals and not three equals?
And I believe that is because
the ID is being stored as a number,
and when you pull the value out of here,
it's being stored as a string.
So we can wrap that in a parseInt
which will then convert it to a number
and fix that for us.
Good, now it gives us an array of the item
that needs to be removed.
We actually want the opposite,
so we'll change that to bang equals
and then we get an array of 11 items,
the one that we deleted is now off.
Okay, so now the question is how do we get
these new items into our items array?
And in our case we just wanna overwrite the entire list.
I showed you earlier that we can push them in,
but I rather just overwrite it after I filtered it.
So we do need to change this const to a let.
I just make it a let and give it a save,
and it makes it back to const,
that's kind of annoying.
So don't save it just yet.
And then in our deleteItem,
we'll just say instead of newItems,
we'll just say items is equal to items.filter.
And if I delete them, they should be deleting.
The way we can tell is if we console.log items,
and they should go down by one.
There you go, 10, 11, nine, eight, seven, here we go.
But if I refresh the page, they're still all there.
So two things need to happen.
First, we need to re-render everything,
and second, we also need to update our local storage.
And you'll notice that both of those things
re-rendering the list and mirroring to local storage
are bound to our itemsUpdated.
So we can simply just fire another itemsUpdated
and just copy this one and paste it in here.
And now it should just work.
Look at that.
Items are being removed as you do it, why?
Because your event listener
is listening for the items to be updated
and then will do its respective work
displaying and mirroring them to local storage.
So I refresh the page and they are working.
Last item we need to do is to work with this,
the checking and unchecking of the data.
So if I put milk, eggs, bread,
and I check all three of those,
refresh the page,
that data is not saved.
So we can make another little function here,
say function markAsComplete taking the ID of that item
and just console.log Marking as complete the id.
Let's get this wired up first.
So like what do we listen for in our case?
We wanna listen for a check of this inbox.
So we can use our event delegation as well.
I can do it right inside of this
or have another event listener.
I'm gonna do it right here and say
if e.target.matches,
we'll look for an input with the type checkbox,
then we'll markAsComplete,
and in this case,
and we need to pass it the ID again as well.
So let's look at our,
is there an input doesn't have an ID on it?
Well, we can fix that.
Let's go to where we make our HTML.
And we'll simply just say the value is equal to item.id.
Now you see the value is on that input.
So we can go back to our event delegation
and just pass it the same thing we did there,
this e.target.value.
And now when you check one,
it says Marking as complete.
This seems a little bit extra to me.
So why don't we do this,
const id is equal to parseInt,
and then we'll replace both of these
with the id variable that we just created.
It still worked.
Good, it seems to still work.
Now let's go back up to our mark complete.
And we need to find the actual item that we want.
So we'll say const itemRef,
we need to find reference to the item
that is being marked as complete,
so we'll take the items and we'll look for it.
How should we look for it?
Well, find.
Find is a great array method.
And then we'll look for the item
or the item.id is equal to the id
that just got passed in, right?
So where the item's ID is equal to this one,
then console.log the itemRef.
Let's see.
Bread, eggs, milk.
And the reason why I called this a ref
is because if I change a value on this object,
it will be reflected in the array of items.
So we can say itemRef.complete is equal to,
now this works for both, like on and off, right?
We could have an if statement here,
we can say if it's true, then set it to false,
and if it's false, set it to true,
or we can just set it to itself but the opposite.
And that will toggle from true to false, why?
Because !true and !false are just the opposites.
So setting it to the bang version of itself,
you're in good hands.
Then what do we do?
Well, let's dispatch itemsUpdated event, why?
Because we updated the items
and we just have to dispatch it,
and it should,
oh look what's happening here.
You check it and it almost seems like it is kinda working.
And if I were to go to my Application
and take a look at this data,
look at that, look at the first one,
you see how it's toggling true to false
but the checkbox is never working, and why is that?
It's because we have not yet supplied
the checked attribute to it
when we rendered out that HTML.
So let's go up here,
find our input with the value of item.id,
a type of checkbox,
and a checked attribute of checked.
And you see by default they're all checked.
Now the thing about a checked attribute is
also if you pass checked is false,
they'll maintain checked.
You pass a checked of hey or ellen or absolutely anything,
even if you just say checked, it will make it checked.
So what makes something unchecked?
The absence of the checked attribute.
So what we need to do here is check
if the checked attribute is true,
and if it is, then put the checked attribute there,
and the way we can do that
is with dollar sign curly brackets.
We'll just say item.checked,
if that is true,
then we'll give it the checked attribute,
otherwise we'll give it nothing.
And, oh, it's not checked, it's completed.
No, it's not completed, it's complete. (laughs)
There we go.
And now when you check them and uncheck them,
they will be showing.
Similarly we could also use the && operator
and that will work exactly the same way.
And I refresh and they stay there.
Whoo!
So I know this is a lot,
but this is how all of those frameworks work
where you are basically have some state,
you write a bunch of handlers to update state
and to modify state and to change it, filter it,
change properties, things like that,
and when that state changes,
then you re-render out the HTML that is on the page.
One last thing I should say here,
and we're gonna go into this in our security issue as well,
but if you have, you could do an image source
equal to anything you want,
so I could say lorem,
lorempixel.com/200,
and you see it tried to create an image on here,
and that's a bit of a security issue
especially with the onload attribute.
So this is a little bit of a security issue
where you take input from a user
and then display it as HTML.
And in the security video we're gonna look at
how we can clean all of the data that the user types in
so that this type of thing doesn't,
look at this, it's like broken right now,
so we'll fix all of that,
we'll come back to that in the security episode.
Talk to you then.